Dakar – The fourth WHO Global School on Refugee and Migrant Health concluded in Dakar, Senegal with renewed optimism to address the crucial social factors that significantly impact the health of refugees and migrants worldwide.
Over five days, from 27 November to 1 December, representatives of governments, United Nations agencies, researchers, NGOs, civil society, and migrant and refugee communities gathered in person in Dakar and online to share experiences, identified gaps, highlighted best practices, and worked together towards achieving health equity globally. The e-learning hybrid was web-streamed globally from Dakar, Senegal.
“The challenges that refugees and migrants face are like those faced by anyone else, but their migration status often exacerbates their vulnerability”, said Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, WHO Director-General. “To protect and promote their health, we must address the social determinants of health, by improving health care access without financial impediment; training culturally sensitive health care providers; tackling socio-economic disparities; fighting stigma and discrimination; and offering social integration and support programs.”
Africa experiences various migratory patterns, including labour migration, refugee flows, and internal displacement. With over 31 million Africans living outside their home country, the majority within the continent itself, intra-regional migration is prevalent, especially in west and southern Africa. Only 25% of African migrants relocate to Europe.
“Refugees and migrants face distinct and significant health threats, with huge hindrances in accessing critical services. As governments work to attain universal health, it is crucial to ensure that no one is left behind, including refugees, migrants and the communities hosting them. This can be achieved through polices and measures that promote, protect and preserve their health and well-being,” said Dr Matshidiso Moeti, WHO Regional Director for Africa.
Senegal, with its rapidly growing economy has long been a significant destination for migrants in the region. The WHO Global School provides an opportunity to address the challenges and opportunities related to migration and refugee health globally and in the country.
Each year, the WHO Global School is hosted in different regions to foster knowledge exchange and leverage the experiences of countries in addressing the health of refugees and migrants. It is an important platform to build capacity and promote evidence-informed interventions for addressing the health of all people on the move in a comprehensive and equitable manner.
